i could do a one-hour livestream not
just about thomas jefferson but about
this book about thomas jefferson
have you heard
in the newspapers in the last five years
something controversial and interesting
with thomas jefferson if so what would
be you could just use one word usually
like you don't have to write it a whole
sentence over if i were to ask you the
25 people in the audience now what is
the one thing you've heard about thomas
jefferson
in the last five years what's the one
thing
there are also quite a few books i have
been reading
that i may wish to comment on to some
extent and by the way i'll be the first
to knew that many of the books i want to
talk about i have not finished reading
there's one thing i learned honestly in
more than five years of being on youtube
what am i up to
seven years some of that okay
so something we've learned in many years
in youtube you know um
you're better off doing the book review
when you're halfway through the book
really really really try it try doing
1000 youtube videos and tell me i'm
wrong you know and and by the way if you
change your mind later
do another video when you finish the
book with further thoughts or what have
you but normally most of your feelings
and thoughts and what you want to talk
about is going to be before uh you you
complete the book and um if in case you
don't know me in case we've never met
before won't you
but you know
i've been reading an extraordinary
amount about
the period in between the american
revolution and the writing of the
constitution i just mentioned a lot of
people don't realize there's a really
significant period of history between
the declaration of independence and the
american constitution and it's a period
in which anything could have happened
and history would have been changed
forever after not just the united states
over the whole world and only very
certain peculiar things did happen so in
terms of just drawing a division between
a secular and religious fanatic you know
thomas jefferson that's the reason why
the reason why hitchens is writing this
ridiculous book flattering thomas
jefferson thomas jefferson is on the
secular free thinking side was he an
atheist no not quite he was on the
spectrum he was on the atheist spectrum
we might say all right
and you know again um
[Music]
certainly someone like governor morris
an effete aristocrat
uh living in wealth and luxury and you
know so and so forth he was a free
thinker and if not an outright atheist
he was again on on the spectrum and
these were people you or i if we got
into a time machine and travel back time
you could sit and have a delightful
lunch or dinner with governor morris or
thomas jefferson
they're also morally despicable people
now
puritanical religious leaders like
herman husband
whether they identified as um
quaker
or as one of the myriad sex or again
most people didn't actually call
themselves puritan i mean it's kind of
retrospectively in history we look back
and say these people were puritans but
you're talking about sort of a mixed bag
of different
protestant fundamentalist
eccentric evangelical you know religious
movements who call themselves all kinds
of things but you know
this type of strident
christian extremist revolutionary
you would not be able to eat lunch with
in the time of the american revolution
itself and then the struggles that
continued after the revolution because
again for some people the revolution
didn't stop and herman husband keeps on
fighting all the way through to what's
called the whiskey rebellion or the
whiskey rebellion period the period of
whiskey rebellions plural that's after
the writing the constitution there were
poor people
suffering under unfair and oppressive
taxes to an unbelievable extent and the
taxes after the american revolution were
much worse than they had been
before the american revolution now i'm
not going to digress into explaining why
and how that was i do know though it's
not mysterious but it's technical and
complex so you know and indeed it's just
worth asking like if you're explaining
this to a 12 year old kid they might say
oh but i thought the whole reason these
guys went out and fought the revolution
was because they they were felt they
were paying taxes that were too high
then after the revolution the taxes are
are way too high yeah we'll tell her
husband about it so he got his gun and
he went back to war i mean he remained
at a state of war or siege with the you
know supposedly democratic government
the new united states america and he
also felt that again i think most people
would say correctly that the newly
created government was not particularly
democratic and was not particularly
egalitarian
bringing this full circle back to what i
mentioned beginning why do you think the
government was not particularly
democratic why do you think it was not
particularly calculating
because that government was created by
and for people like governor morris john
adams and
yes yes y'all thomas jefferson i mean if
if thomas jefferson was not an
aristocrat in the strictest sense of the
term you know who was when you picture
in your mind's eye
an aristocrat
you know thomas jefferson visiting paris
in his
you know 18th century
you know culotte in his
silk
uh you know and his irmine and his male
accompanied by his slaves
thomas jefferson was an aristocrat i
can't even say in all but name he was an
earthquad in every possible meaningful
sense of the word and he was received in
paris as an aristocrat by other
restaurants he was a land-owning
slave-driving aristocrat now some people
say
that thomas jefferson when he was in
paris
started having sex
with his 16 year old black slave
that's grossly misleading according to
this book she was 14 at the time
i do not know what motivates people like
christopher hitchens to write propaganda
of this kind but the book really is
propaganda it's this kind of awful
shameful shoddy
dishonest uh rewriting of history i
really do not sympathize with
christopher richardson writing this book
at all
um
it's poorly written i mean it's not the
quality
how shall i say this quality of writing
is
patchy which is like it's not
consistently terrible
but like
yeah but like like maybe one sentence
out of eight
i say out loud that was really badly
written you know what i mean like that's
it's not swinging for the fences
um
but you know obviously the style is not
the the most important problem he still
does this really teenage thing of trying
to show off that he knows words you
don't know
so i think for you maybe there have been
like five words that were not in your
vocabulary like words you have never
seen in english language for me i think
it was maybe just one word but i i have
an unusually
i have an unusual vocabulary unusual is
a good word for my but yeah um
not a humble brag but yeah but even then
like the other words that like i knew
the meaning of and you didn't i was just
laughing out loud i was like oh well
melissa how could you possibly not know
and use this word in everyday
conversations it's just like ludicrously
obscure vocabulary thrown in for no
reason this is the least of the books
problems all right so
um so there was a 14 year old girl was
sent across the atlantic
in 1787 to join thomas jefferson in
paris so thomas jefferson is on a
diplomatic mission in paris and this
slave girl is sent to him now according
to this book she's 14 at the time other
sources claim 15 or 16 you can imagine
reasons why some people might want to
round up the first clue to the
relationship between thomas jefferson
and this 14 year old black slave girl
the first clue to the relationship may
lie in the simple fact that jefferson
having met sally and received his
daughter from her in good condition did
not send her home again
as he had planned to do with the
original escort
he did not require an extra service at
the hotel de longiac his well-appointed
residence where sally's brothers james
was already on the staff being trained
as a french chef
so her brother james you realize is also
a black american slave and in france
actually their slave contract is null
and void these slaves would have the
right to run away or even sue their
slave masters so he's in a bit of a
dangerous position bringing his black
american slaves to france
under these conditions
uh possibly the latter consideration
influenced him in inviting sally to stay
on now i know something it may not be
striking how it dishonestly is possibly
the fact that her brother was there
training to be a chef she was pregnant
immediately after his arrival in paris
oh yes well you know it's certainly
interesting that he decided not to send
her back perhaps it's because her
brother was studying to be a chef
who would write this sorry i'm going to
say who would write this in 2021
obviously this is written a few years
ago like i could get the the date was
the date of first publication of this
right it's not ancient history guys but
you know okay uh so this was 2005 this
was written what what is the point of
writing a book that's going to deal with
thomas jefferson's sex life if you can't
really
be honest with it you know what i mean
so by the way uh shout out to shout out
to several people in the audience who
knew what i was hinting at uh answers to
my question rich davin said quote he was
sexually open-minded nacho who to us is
known as not yet said that he had an
affair with his slave
so yes in 1788 jefferson began to pay
wages to her and her brother james
although he had never paid james a
regular wage before moreover slavery was
not recognized as legal on french soil a
fact of which jefferson was aware and
one that it would not have taken sally
long to find out yes a 14 year old with
absolutely no education would certainly
be in a position to exercise their legal
rights
she could have run away but i mean
in a country where she doesn't speak the
language i mean
why would anyone presume she is
illiterate in any language 14 year old
slave raised very literally on a slave
plantation in uh in virginia jefferson
and hemmings did not have a master slave
relationship in the vile sense that is
normally understood period no footnote
no footnote no parentheses this is
actually the end of the paragraph
so he ends up he ends a paragraph saying
jefferson and hemings did not have a
master slave relationship in the vile
sense that is normally understood
2005 christopher hitchens poses
christopher hitchens not a genius
quote most historians until recently
took the view that a sexual liaison was
literally unthinkable certainly
unthinkable in the sense that historians
barely thought about it for two reasons
the first was the revulsion that it is
simply assumed jefferson must have felt
either for any carnal knowledge of a
slave or depending upon the prejudices
of the historian any carnal knowledge of
a black woman now
this is even more bizarre because
melissa and i know where this is going
next
hitchens is going to the author of this
book is going to proceed to argue
that sally hemmings his black slave
should not be considered black at all
that she was not black
that really she was white
totally so you're you're saying you're
commenting that some historians are
prejudiced in that they can't believe
thomas jefferson would be attracted to a
black woman and then you proceed to
argue that this woman was not black
um
in the case of do malone whose enormous
hygiography of jefferson has been
standard for far too long one suspects
that the historian had great difficulty
considering the question of carnal
knowledge at all
in so here we go here come the excuses
in status sally was barely a slave
what is that supposed to mean
what is that supposed to mean so by the
way if you guys don't know
christopher hitch
let me just disclose ethnically
i am considered jewish
now in fact
i am only half jewish but politically
i'm considered jewish right obama
barack obama
ethnically
he's half black and half white nobody
ever refers to barack obama as white
right his political status in this
society is his identity
is being a black person okay what what
was christopher hitchens ethnic identity
he chose to identify
as jewish
and he was not even five percent jewish
he had one incredibly remote jewish
ancestor nobody in his family identified
as jewish his own brother who was uh
further to the right politically than
him was more conservative than him his
own brother repeatedly publicly
denounced him for this and said in our
family nobody was raised jewish his
brother said that he doesn't identify as
jewish that their own father and mother
were in no way jewish that neither
culturally
culturally they were not jewish at all
he didn't deny that if you went back and
researched the family tree far enough
there was this one remote ancestor
who was jewish but like guess what if
you go back far enough we all come from
africa you know so christopher agencies
how is it possible that christopher
hitchens chooses to identify as jewish
on the basis of a tiny fragment of his
dna he went his whole life long at
speeches
charismatically telling the crowd that
he identified as a jewish atheist that
was his identity his whole life how is
that possible and he looks at the life
of a
14 year old black slave from the
american south
virgin virginia specifically state of
virginia and he says oh well this person
wasn't really a slave and wasn't really
black and her relationship with her
slave master who got her pregnant six
times starting at age 14
wasn't really
wasn't really slavery this is
too christopher richards in 2005. he was
not a young man in 2005. alexa in what
year was christopher hitchens born
on april 13 1949.
he was born in 1949
so his age in 2005 was old okay he was
officially old
he was too old and what
that's old you were old you were old
enough about the birds and the bees and
you were old enough to know about the
blacks and the whites i mean you are old
enough to know racism
he was if he was 18 years old you know
21 years old like well kid you got some
things to learn about racism in virginia
like guess what still today in virginia
if you are one-quarter black
and three-quarters white your political
identity is black but back in the
1770s through the 1790s
let me tell you something if you were
one-quarter black or one-eighth black in
virginia like are you kidding is it
really plausible that christopher
hitchens is this ignorant or this stupid
okay so he is he is claiming we continue
creating quote in status sally was
barely a slave and reckoning by quote
race unquote
she was by descent and in appearance
very nearly white
[Laughter]
it's just ridiculous he's been i mean he
spent time in america i mean i know he's
british but still i mean he's well
traveled especially with the united
states well you know in a lot of these
countries whether it's america brazil
mexico the caribbean you know like
are are you kidding
jefferson was later to compose an
insanely complicated ethnographical
diagram to show how after a certain
number of crossings between a black and
a sorry so between a black person and a
white person the
this is a quotation do not okay youtube
i am quoting a book i'm gonna hold up
the book
after a certain number of crossings the
taint
of africa was removed his words not mine
sadly was a quote-unquote quadroon
and both she and three of her sons the
only slaves jefferson ever freed were
able to register as white in the census
of 1830. most of the so this is his
claim
behind this baffling most of their
descendants continue to live on the
white side of what is still america's
most hazardous frontier
which surely qualifies sally hemmings
whose grave now lies somewhere into the
parking lot of the hampton inn in
charlottesville as one of the republic's
founding mothers
um
so so there are a series of bizarre and
impossible to support claims there from
christopher hitchens the first is the
claim that thomas jefferson's slave
wasn't really his slave the second that
she wasn't really black like
why what do you have to gain by telling
this lie it's just mind-blowing to me
[Music]
foreign